# Generating Text

WordSiv provides several methods for generating text:

- **Word(s)**: [`word()`](#random-word-word),
  [`words()`](#list-of-random-words-words),
  [`top_word()`](#most-common-word-top_word),
  [`top_words()`](#list-of-most-common-words-top_words)
- **Sentence(s)**: [`sent()`](#sentence-sent), [`sents()`](#list-of-sentences-sents)
- **Paragraph(s)**: [`para()`](#paragraph-para),
  [`paras()`](#multiple-paragraphs-paras)
- **Text Block**: [`text()`](#text-block-text)

For methods that generate text with probabilities (not `top_word()`, `top_words()`), there are options for adjusting the randomness of the output:

- **[`seed`](#repeatable-output-seed)**: Make output repeatable (deterministic)
- **[`rnd`](#word-randomness-rnd)**: Blend in fully random word selection with
  probability-based word selection
- **[`rnd_punc`](#punctuation-randomness-rnd_punc)**: Blend in fully random
  punctuation selection with the default probability-based punctuation selection

There are also additional options:

- **[`numbers`](#mixing-in-numbers-numbers)**: Mix-in figures with the words
- **[`punc`](#disabling-punctuation-punc)**: Optionally disable punctuation
- **[`top_k`](#limiting-word-pool-top_k)**: Restrict the word list used for text generation to `top_k` (most probable) words

## Text Generation Methods

WordSiv is structured so that word generation calls cascade, passing arguments
from the larger to smaller text generation methods. So when you call `text()`, you get this chain of method calls:

`text()` ➔ `paras()` ➔ `para()` ➔ `sents()` ➔ `sent()` ➔ `words()` ➔ `word()`

This means you can pass arguments to `text()` that will effect all the smaller
text generation methods it calls:

```python
--8<-- "text-propagation.py"
```

### Random Word (`word()`)

The `word()` method returns a single word, randomly selected from the Vocab (weighted by word probability). See also [word filter arguments](../filtering-words).

```python
--8<-- "word.py"
```

### Most Common Word (`top_word()`)

The `top_word()` method returns the most common word or the nth common word.
See also [word filter arguments](../filtering-words).

```python
--8<-- "top-word.py"
```

### List of Random Words (`words()`)

The `words()` method returns a list of words generated by `word()` (randomly
selected from the Vocab, weighted by word probability). See also [word filter arguments](../filtering-words).

```python
--8<-- "words.py"
```

### List of Most Common Words (`top_words()`)

The `top_words()` method returns a list of the most common words in descending
frequency order. See also [word filter arguments](../filtering-words).

```python
--8<-- "top-words.py"
```

### Sentence (`sent()`)

The `sent()` method returns a single sentence, joining the output of `words()`
with punctuation (optionally). See also [word filter
arguments](../filtering-words).

```python
--8<-- "sent.py"
```

### List of Sentences (`sents()`)

The `sents()` method returns a list of sentences generated from `sent()`. See
also [word filter arguments](../filtering-words).

```python
--8<-- "sents.py"
```

### Paragraph (`para()`)

The `para()` method returns a single paragraph, joining the output of `sents()`.
See also [word filter arguments](../filtering-words).

```python
--8<-- "para.py"
```

### Multiple Paragraphs (`paras()`)

The `paras()` method returns a list of paragraphs generated from `para()`.
See also [word filter arguments](../filtering-words).

```python
--8<-- "paras.py"
```

### Text Block (`text()`)

The `text()` method generates a text block, joining the output of `paras()`. See
also [word filter arguments](../filtering-words).

```python
--8<-- "text.py"
```

## Adjusting Randomness

### Repeatable Output (`seed`)

For reproducible results, you can set a random [seed] when initializing WordSiv
or for individual function calls. This is essential if you want your proof to
remain the same until you make changes to the code (or your glyphs).

```python
--8<-- "seed.py"
```

This example might give you a better example of how this works:
```python
--8<-- "seed-demo.py"
```

### Word Randomness (`rnd`)

The `rnd` parameter controls how random the word generation is. This is useful
for outputting more less-probable words, especially when your glyph set is
limited (the probability distribution becomes even more skewed towards short,
common words).

- `rnd=0`: Use word probabilities to select words (default)
- `rnd=1`: Completely random word selection
- `0<rnd<1`: Interpolation of word probability distribution and fully random
  distribution

```python
--8<-- "rnd.py"
```

### Punctuation Randomness (`rnd_punc`)

The `rnd_punc` parameter controls how random the punctuation generation is. This
is useful for getting less common punctuation that statistically doesn't occur
all that often.

- `rnd_punc=0`: Use punctuation frequencies to select punctuation (default)
- `rnd_punc=1`: Completely random punctuation selection
- `0<rnd_punc<1`: Interpolation of punctuation frequency distribution and fully
  random distribution

```python
--8<-- "rnd-punc.py"
```

## Additional Options

### Limiting Word Pool (`top_k`)

You can restrict word selection to the most common `top_k` words. This is useful
if you want to generate text with only highly-frequent words:

```python
--8<-- "top-k.py"
```

### Mixing In Numbers (`numbers`)

You can include basic random figures in your text (constrained by `glyphs`) with
the `numbers` parameter:

```python
--8<-- "numbers.py"
```

### Disabling Punctuation (`punc`)

You can disable punctuation with the `punc` parameter:

```python
--8<-- "punc-false.py"
```

[seed]: https://www.reddit.com/r/learnpython/comments/s678b0/explain_randomseed_like_im_five/
